# UUCSL Package

Implemented in Python 3, **scipy** package required

Install Python:
https://www.python.org/downloads/

How to install python packages:
https://packaging.python.org/tutorials/installing-packages/


## Contributors

1. Mikhail Yu. Myshkin <mikhail.myshkin@phystech.edu>
2. Maxim A. Dubinnyi <dumkas@yandex.ru>
3. Zakhar O. Shenkarev <zakhar-shenkarev@yandex.ru>

Group of Structural Biology of the Ion Channels, IBCh RAS, Russia,
Moscow <http://www.ibch.ru/en/structure/groups/sbic>

---
## Licence

The program is distributed under AGPL-3.0 license and is
available at https://github.com/mmjmike/UUCSL


---
## Goal of the program

UUCSL is a Python 3 package that calculates universal unambiguous
combinatorial selective labeling schemes to label proteins with stable
13C and 15N isotopes and perform fast NMR signal assignment

---

## Package scripts

* **ncsgen.py** - interactive console application, that generates files,
    describing NMR coding systems (NCS), based on the spectra and labeling types
    which are entered by user
* **blockfinder.py** - generates Elementary Blocks (ELB) for universal
    scheme calculation, based on the chosen NCS and number of samples limit
* **elbclean.py** - cleans redundant blocks from elementary blocks file
* **elbstats.py** - calculates stats for elementary blocks files
* **UUCSL.py** - main script that calculates universal labeling schemes
    for a given list of amino acid types and ELB file, and performs
    price optimization of the schemes based on amino acid prices and
    availability of particular labeling types
* **CombLabel.py** - main script that calculates optimal (or price-optimal)
    sequence-specific combinatorial labeling schemes for a given sequence, 
    NCS, labeled amino acid stock and amino acid prices. It also can take
    already obtained assignment into account.
* **CombLabel_check.py** - calculates labeling dictionary for particular
    protein sequence and UUCSL solution and prints out solution statistics

---

## Package data folders

* **NCS** - here are collected generated by `ncsgen.py` NCS-files
    for NMR coding systems described in the article [1].
* **ELB** - precalculated and cleaned elementary blocks for different
    NCSs and different numbers of samples
* **prices** - amino acid prices files that were used for optimization
    of labeling schemes
* **examples** - contains folders with examples of scheme optimization
    for different NCSs

---

## How to use

### ncsgen.py

**ncsgen.py** is run without any command line arguments and will
inetractively ask
the user to enter particular data about NMR coding system. After
obtaining all required information it automatically generates `*.ncs`
file with following contents:

~~~~
[NCS = NC2]
[Deuterated = False]
[Labels = X,N,C]
[Spectra = HSQC,HNCO]

[code_pairs]
 , X, N, C
X, 0, 1, 0
N, 0, 1, 0
C, 0, 2, 0

[codes]
Code,   HSQC,   HNCO
   0,      0,      0
   1,      1,      0
   2,      1,      1
~~~~
Typical NCSs are collected in `NCS` folder of the package.


---
### blockfinder.py

**blocksfinder.py** searches for ELementary Blocks (ELB), out of which
 the labeling scheme can be constructed. As the input it takes two
 positional command line arguments: `ncs` (NCS) and `samples` (maximal
 number of
 samples in the resulting blocks). It starts from one-sample blocks and
 moves to more samples as it finds all blocks in previous number of
 samples and outputs non-equivalent blocks with at least two patterns
 to file `*_elb.txt`. It is wise to run this script with low number of
 samples (2-4) before increasing the number, as the task of
 finding the blocks becomes combinatorially hard.

 **blocksfinder.py** has some more command-line arguments:

 * `--minpatterns, -p` - minimal number of patterns that outputted ELBs
  must have. Slightly increases the speed of the calculation and is
  suitable for checking whether a labeling scheme of P patterns can be
  found in S samples for a given NCS
 * `--verbose, -v` - makes detailed output to stdout
 * `--silent, -s` - makes no output to stdout. Overrides `-v` argument
 * `--mintfree, -t` - defines minimal number of patterns without 'T'
  labels. This parameter was used to calculate blocks of 3 samples for
   ALT12 scheme

Typical blockfinder output:
~~~~
[NCS = NC2]
[ELB samples = 2 patterns = 2]
NC
CN
[ELB samples = 3 patterns = 3]
NNC
NCN
CNN
[ELB samples = 4 patterns = 4]
NNNC
NNCN
NCNN
CNNN
...
~~~~
---
### elbstats.py

**elbstats.py** takes ELB-file as input and calculates how many blocks
of each size are contained in the given ELB-file.

Typical **elbstats.py** output:
~~~~
Blocks used:
 2 X  2 - 1 block(s)
 3 X  3 - 1 block(s)
 4 X  4 - 2 block(s)
 5 X  5 - 4 block(s)
 5 X  6 - 1 block(s)
 6 X  7 - 10 block(s)
 6 X  8 - 2 block(s)
 6 X  9 - 1 block(s)
 7 X 10 - 8 block(s)
 7 X 11 - 1 block(s)
-----------
 2 X . - 1 block(s)
 3 X . - 1 block(s)
 4 X . - 2 block(s)
 5 X . - 5 block(s)
 6 X . - 13 block(s)
 7 X . - 9 block(s)
 TOTAL - 31 blocks
~~~~
----
### elbclean.py

**elbclean.py** takes ELB-file as input and cleans redundant blocks from
the file. Writes separate "clean" ELB-file.

---
### UUCSL.py

**UUCSL.py** is the main script in the package. It calculates the
resulting price-optimized labeling schemes using direct products of
ELBs (concatenated patterns of two or more ELBs in all possible
combinations) and simplex algorithm.

It has 3 positional command-line arguments:
* `ncs` - NCS
* `elb_file` - ELB-file
* `price_file` - file with prices (prices of commercially available in
2016 amino acids with various labeling types are collected in `csv`
prices-files in `prices` folder of the package)

Optional command line arguments:
* `--aminoacids, -a` - list of amino acids (one-letter code) in the
 final scheme. By default the script uses the list of all 20 biogenic
 amino acids.
* `--notaminoacids, -n` - list of amino acids that will not be
 concidered in scheme calculation. This command will override
 intersections with `-a` argument.
* `--jobname, -j` - this value will be used as a prefix to all output files
* `--verbose, -v` - makes detailed output to stdout
* `--silent, -s` - makes no output to stdout. Overrides `-v` argument

Typical output of **UUCSL.py**

~~~~
Best scheme
[NCS = NCD4]
[solution]
Res,S1,S2,S3,S4,S5,S6
Ala, N, D, D, N, N, C
Arg, D, X, D, N, D, D
Asn, D, X, D, D, N, D
Asp, N, D, D, N, D, D
Cys, X, N, N, N, N, C
Gln, D, X, D, N, N, C
Glu, N, D, D, D, N, D
Gly, N, D, D, N, C, N
His, X, N, N, N, D, D
Ile, D, X, D, N, C, N
Leu, D, X, D, C, N, N
Lys, D, D, X, N, D, D
Met, X, N, N, N, C, N
Phe, D, D, X, N, N, C
Pro, X, X, X, F, X, F
Ser, D, D, X, N, C, N
Thr, D, D, X, D, N, D
Trp, X, N, N, C, N, N
Tyr, D, D, X, C, N, N
Val, N, D, D, C, N, N
[price]
13530.304579999996

Blocks used for this scheme:
[ELB samples = 3 patterns = 4]
XNN
NDD
DXD
DDX
[ELB samples = 3 patterns = 5]
NNC
NCN
NDD
CNN
DND
~~~~

---
### CombLabel.py

**CombLabel.py** 

It has 3 positional command-line arguments:
* `ncs` - the name of NMR coding system (NCS). Typical NCSs are collected
 in `NCS` folder of the package
* `sequence_file` - file, containing amino acid sequence of the protein of
interest in one-letter code. `*.fasta` files can be used.
* `stock_file` - file with prices (prices of commercially available in
2016 amino acids with various labeling types are collected in `csv`
prices-files in `prices` folder of the package)

Optional command line arguments:
* `--price, -p` - file with prices (prices of commercially available in
2016 amino acids with various labeling types are collected in `csv`
prices-files in `prices` folder of the package). This argument is also 
the flag for price optimization
* `--jobname, -j` - this value will be used as a prefix to all output files
* `--number_samples, -n` - the number of samples to start with (1-9). Default
value is 1. If the scheme is not found for a given number of samples, then the
value is incremented. This argument may be used if the program spends too much
time calculating scheme in N samples, and the way to use it is to set the value
as N+1
* `--assignment, -a` - file with the numbers of assigned residues in the order
 they are in the sequence file. When calculating the labeling scheme only the
 residue pairs where the assigned residues are second will be skipped.
* `--verbose, -v` - makes detailed output to stdout
* `--silent, -s` - makes no output to stdout. Overrides `-v` argument

**CombLabel.py** outputs a file with coding dictionary.



---
### CombLabel_check.py

**CombLabel_check.py** - calculates labeling dictionary and assignment
statistics given NCS, labeling scheme and protein sequence.

Positional arguments:
* `ncs` - NCS (NMR coding system)
* `sequence` - protein sequence (one-letter code, `*.fasta` files)
* `solution` - solution file, e.g. output file of `UUCSL.py`

Optional argument:
* `--prices, -p` - prices-file, like one that can be used by `UUCSL.py`

Example of labeling dictionary (`*_dictionary.txt`):
~~~~
...
0112110: P60 - Q61
0121021: L8 - W9
0121120: L120 - Q121
0121120: L150 - Q151
0121120: L47 - Q48
0121210: F122 - Q123
0122011: K87 - W88
0211102: I134 - M135
0211102: I29 - M30
0211210: V129 - Q130
0212201: T74 - M75
0221021: A71 - W72
...
~~~~

Assignment statistics (`*_solution.txt`) contains a variety of
statistical information about protein sequence and given solution.

---

## Example of usage

to be added


## Future improvements:

* make `blockfinder.py` and `UUCSL.py` calculations parallel
* code refactoring
* precompilation of core components to improve speed

## Citation

When using this package for scientific use, please cite the following
paper:

[1] M.Dubinnyi, M.Myshkin, Z.Shenkarev: "UUCSL: Universal unambiguous
combinatorial selective labeling schemes" JBNMR, 2019